Project Overview
This project implements a semantic segmentation model to detect parking lot occupancy using a deep learning approach. The model processes images of parking lots and identifies whether parking spaces are occupied or vacant. The primary goal is to enable real-time parking space detection for smart parking management systems.

The project leverages the PKLot dataset, consisting of 12,000 labeled images of parking lots in various conditions, such as different weather, lighting, and occupancy scenarios. The segmentation task involves classifying pixels into categories representing vehicles and parking spaces.

The models used for this project include:

Semantics CNN
U-Net
Vision Transformer
Modified ResNet
Key Features
High Precision: The model achieves up to 99.91% precision, making it highly accurate for detecting parking occupancy.
Robustness: The system handles challenging environments, such as changes in weather and lighting conditions.
Real-time Capabilities: Designed for real-time parking space monitoring and management.
Models and Architecture
Semantics CNN: A convolutional neural network specialized for pixel-wise classification.
U-Net: A fully convolutional neural network (FCN) known for semantic segmentation, with a U-shaped architecture that facilitates precise pixel classification.
Vision Transformer: A transformer-based model that handles image segmentation by considering long-range dependencies.
Modified ResNet: A customized version of the ResNet architecture adapted for semantic segmentation tasks, with modifications to the skip connections and output layers.
Dataset
The PKLot dataset is used for training and testing the models. The dataset consists of:

12,000 images captured from various parking lots.
Labels include occupied and vacant parking spaces.
The dataset includes diverse conditions such as rainy, sunny, and cloudy weather to ensure robustness across different scenarios.
Performance Metrics
To assess the effectiveness of the models, the following metrics are employed:

Precision
Recall
Intersection over Union (IoU)
F1-Score
The models were evaluated and compared based on these metrics, with the U-Net and Vision Transformer architectures performing exceptionally well in both precision and recall.

Installation & Setup
To set up and run the project, follow these steps:

Prerequisites
Python 3.8+
TensorFlow or PyTorch (for model implementation)
OpenCV (for image preprocessing)
NumPy
Matplotlib (for visualization)
Scikit-learn (for evaluation metrics)
Clone the Repository
bash
Copy code
git clone https://github.com/your-repository/parking-lot-detection.git
cd parking-lot-detection
Install Dependencies
You can install the required dependencies using the following command:

bash
Copy code
pip install -r requirements.txt
Dataset Preparation
Download the PKLot dataset from this link.
Extract the dataset and place it in the data/ directory.
Update the data paths in the configuration file (config.py) to point to the dataset location.
Training the Model
To train the model, run the following command:

bash
Copy code
python train.py --model <model_name> --epochs <num_epochs>
Example:

bash
Copy code
python train.py --model unet --epochs 50
Testing and Evaluation
Once the model is trained, you can evaluate its performance using the test dataset:

bash
Copy code
python evaluate.py --model <model_name>
Real-time Inference
To perform real-time inference on parking lot images or video streams:

bash
Copy code
python inference.py --input <input_file>
Usage
This project is designed to integrate seamlessly into smart parking management systems. It can be used for:

Real-time parking lot monitoring.
Parking space availability prediction.
Parking guidance systems for drivers.
Results
The project achieved the following results on the test set:

Best Precision: 99.91% (using U-Net)
Best IoU: 92.34% (using Vision Transformer)
Visualizations of the segmentation results, along with occupancy statistics, can be found in the results/ directory.

Future Work
Transfer Learning: Implement transfer learning for enhanced adaptability to new parking lots.
Edge Deployment: Deploy the model on edge devices for local processing and real-time updates.
Continuous Learning: Introduce mechanisms for continuous model improvement through feedback from the deployment environment.
Contributions
Swayam Mehta: Project Lead and Developer.
Contributions from peers and reviewers are welcomed!
License
This project is licensed under the MIT License. See the LICENSE file for more details.
